# Letters to MOQDiscuss

##Two Minds - 11/4/2015

If things have been too quiet, let me throw some things out there for discussion.  I know I'm late to the party so if any of this has been discussed before, feel free to point me in the right direction.

A thing occurred to me while reading Lila that is really a technical point, albeit I think an important one, that doesn't really change any conclusions that Pirsig makes, but that may be worth discussion.

Pirsig indicates that the Intellectual level emerges from the social level(and by definition emerged in time after the social level) and thus has moral authority over it.

I think this is technically wrong, although the technical reasons don't end up changing many of the conclusions.

I think that both the social and intellectual levels emerged out of the biological level.  The intellectual did emerge after the social and still holds moral authority over it and still has access to it, but it is more correct to say that it emerged from biology.

I think this because it more adequately fits what we see in reality.  Our brains have many parts and recent Psychological analysis shows that it also has multiple modes.  Kahneman puts this forward in Thinking Fast and Slow ( http://amzn.to/1MzA82R ).  Here we see System 1 (Quick Judgments) and System 2 (Methodical Thought) being driven by various parts of the brain and assimilated in the neocortex.  The theory is that the more reptilian brain evolved first, and the neocortex evolved with access to these other parts of the brain to add prediction and better fitness.  System 1 is the social level brain and System 2 is the intellectual part.  System 1 just is and just does.  System 2 can override and use simulated expectations as a basis.

Ultimately though, both evolutions were biological responses to fitness.  Both emerged out of biology and out of what the biological level values (fitness).

I think this is important because at one point Pirsig says that a level only has access to the level below it.  I think the Intellectual level does have access to the biological(although it has many built in biases because System 1 was around with it developed).  System 2 may even be completely reliant on System 1 existing, but it can still reach down through it and act at the biological level.

Unfortunately the fallout from this is that distinguishing that the intellectual level should have moral authority over the social level becomes even murkier.  Unfortunately this also seems be an accurate map of the territory.  I’m from Houston and yesterday we voted down our Houston Equal Rights Ordinance(HERO) because we have a significant portion of our population that has no desire to operate at an intellectual level.  It is all still way to social here in the South and social means that that guy over there is going to get one over on me if I don’t take it for myself.  Boo us.

--------------------------------------------

Arlo,

Thanks for the recommendations.  They are on the way to my kindle!

Let me explain a bit about why I am currently at my current conclusions.  I've been thinking a good bit not just about the levels, but also about how each operates.  What is the gas of each level?  What makes it go?  What is the value that quality illuminates?

Pirsig has this to say about biology vs inorganic in Lila:

Biological evolution can be seen as a process by which weak Dynamic forces at a subatomic level discover stratagems for overcoming huge static inorganic forces at a superatomic level. They do this by selecting superatomic mechanisms in which a number of options are so evenly balanced that a weak Dynamic force can tip the balance one way or another.

Pirsig, Robert (2013-11-06). Lila: An Inquiry Into Morals (p. 167). Random House Publishing Group. Kindle Edition.

So what makes the inorganic 'go', what it values are this forces of nature.  Patterned forces are valued in such a way that enough patterns are produced by dynamic quality that biology can emerge.

Now the biological level has access to the inorganic and regularly uses patterned forces to its advantage, but the patterned forces aren't what makes the biological 'go.'  Instead we find an economy of fitness.  A variety of fitness generated by dynamic quality produces a social layer that has access to both the biological and inorganic, but again, a new economy emerges.  The social values resources...a literal economy...where institutions and grouping emerge that seek to allocate resources in away that spreads and grows the institution. Valued resources allocation emerges in states and banks and all kinds of social institutions that increase the quality of resource allocation.  We can say at this point that the economy at the social level is fundamentally different than at the biological level because mere fitness is not the driver of the quality at this level.

This is where my uncomfortableness came from with the intellectual emerging out of the social.  Perhaps I'll see better how this occurs in the recommended titles, but as I see it now, the emergence of intelligence is not  built on an economy of resources.  It is an alternate form of fitness where an organism can observe time and make valuable inferences(predictions) about the future.  This manifests itself in things like language where we see a set sound producing and expected meaning.  Since intellect came after social the intellect can use all kinds of social symbols and concepts, but it isn't exclusive.  Intelligence also gives us basic prediction like 'If I drop this rock it will fall' and later leading to, after valued prediction emerges from dynamic quality, 'If I drop this rock it will accelerate at 9.8m/s'.  The ability to make this kind of observation increase the fitness of the organism that can avoid falling rocks.

I would agree that most of our important intellectual constructs have a social component to them and so many of the conclusion can probably be made whatever the answer is.

Again...thanks for the recommendations and I'll revert once I get through them.,

Austin


---------------


Bo,

Thanks for writing.  My initial discussions with people on the topic are driving me back to make better sense out of the idea of subject/object metaphysics.  I must admit that I'm not quite there yet.  I think I'm still very much in the materialists camp, but I don't buy reductionism.  In fact, Pirsig's levels seem like a great fit for explaining why reductionism looks rational when we talk about physics, but breaks down when we start talking about higher levels.

The mystery for me is why this SOM vs. MOQ is such a big falling out anyway.  If Quality ends up producing subjects and objects, then are they not as real as we can see?  Should we not treat the objects as a thing that was produced by quality?  Is that not a thing to be cherished and marveled at?

I think I look at things from an odd angle because I read Pirsig after spending a couple of years thinking about Chris Alexander's Nature of Order and his idea of Wholeness.  I see quality as this driver of wholeness and potentially the thing that helps it all hang together.  I'm also not so sure that dynamic is as dynamic as the word dynamic makes it sound.  I think there are rules and/or patterns that show how this quality moves systems toward more wholeness and that Alexander does a good job of chasing them out.

>Maybe even Pirsig's "weak inorganic forces" is misleading as it leads
to the illusion that the MOQ has a better scientific explanation how the
various levels emerged.

Yes, this may be my misunderstanding because this is what I keep wanting to do.  This is probably tied to my growing up in a christian culture wanting to ascribe some generative over arching force to the universe to fill a gap in my mind.   I'm not really looking to the MOQ for scientific answers...because I don't think I'll find scientific evidence, but I do expect to find a echo of 'how things happened' that matches up with 'how things will continue to happen.'  I'm interested in how things will continue to happen as someone who is interested in trans-humanism.  I'm looking for what patterns cause the latch and open a new universe of possibility.  The levels are causing me to look in more diverse areas than before.

Inorganic -> Biology II (Life like activity that doesn't trade in fitness, but instead something else)
Biology -> System III (An organic platform that trades in neither resource allocation or time based prediction)
Social -> Supersociety (subjective structures built on resource allocation models but that ultimately transcend and trade on something 'else')
Intellectual -> Superintellegence (scientific structures that effortlessly use historical reality into constructing future realities)

>and so strong is
SOM that it mesmerizes most of us into seeing the MOQ's 4th level as
thinking (=manipulate concepts)

My reasoning that there is a 4th level and that it is ok to call it intellectual is a bit different than this.  I think thinking emerges from the fact that our neocortex can handle time based sequences really well(see http://arxiv.org/pdf/1511.00083v1.pdf).  This biological adaptation in this one part of the brain caused us to be able to observe and predict time based sequences better by an(or even a couple) of order of magnitude better than our nearest primate cousins.

I don't think the 4th level is manipulation of symbols only.  I think it is access to passing time and the ability to manipulate it.  It is maybe an odd thing to say that before the intellectual level emerged that time didn't really exist, but if Pirsig can say that gravity didn't exist before Newton then I'll go ahead and say it.  This is consistent with my observations of things like Economics where homoeconomicus makes decisions with all the facts at the time but generally doesn't take time into account.  Now I'm not saying that biological, inorganic, and social constructs aren't affected by time, just that they don't have access to time as a concept that they can leverage.  Manipulation of symbols fits into this idea of having access to time because a symbol will produce an effect in time.

That is the theory anyway.

>I won't argue, it will carry me too far, but only say that intelligence
obviously is a biological pattern because animals can be uncannily
smart even though they don't think by language. Perhaps by biological
senses? Smell is a strong conveyor of memory ..no?

I think I also disagree with most of the cutoffs for social and intellectual as being only human.  I agree that clearly there are social and intellectual things happening at non-human levels.  Now since a dog doesn't have language, is it really intellectual since he doesn't have a 'subjective' word for it?  I don't know, but he has a highly developed part of his brain that makes him form a social bond with those that provide him resources and has some ability to predict that if the sun starts coming through the front window I should sit in the hall and wag my tail because that seems to coincide with the human coming home.

>but intellect will hotly deny any social
connection, social value is intellect's "evil" which must be avoided at all
costs. Reason hates emotions ... no?

I'll have to think about this.  I don't know that I agree that reason hates emotions and that social value is evil compared to intellectual value.  This may get into the distinction that I'm currently making between moral authority and moral responsibility.  Each level that arises has moral authority over the last, but to treat it with moral responsibility it will also attempt to preserve as much as it can at the lower level.  If we preserve societal structures we give more ability for supersocities to emerge.  If we preserve biological species we've increased the rate at which evolution can occur in aggregate.

Thanks for writing,
Austin

----
